---
layout: post
title: DNS server (Bind9) Unit 13
author:
language: EN
---

***Operating System*** \[Ubuntu Server 20.04\]

[Help Wiki](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/BIND9ServerHowto)

> <b>**Introduction**</b>
>
> Domain Name Service (DNS) is an Internet service that maps IP addresses and fully qualified domain names (FQDN) to one another. In this way, DNS alleviates the need to remember IP addresses. Computers that run DNS are called name servers. Ubuntu ships with BIND (Berkley Internet Naming Daemon), the most widely deployed DNS server.
>
> This guide is aimed at people looking to learn how to configure and maintain a DNS server, such as for a network (caching name server) or to serve DNS zones for a domain name. 

### Installation

At a terminal prompt, enter the following command to install dns:

```
~$ sudo apt install bind9
```

The DNS configuration files are stored in the `/etc/bind` directory. The primary configuration file is `/etc/bind/named.conf`, which in the layout provided by the package just includes these files.

  - /etc/bind/named.conf.options: global DNS options
  - /etc/bind/named.conf.local: for your zones
  - /etc/bind/named.conf.default-zones: default zones such as localhost, its reverse, and the root hints

### Primary Server

In this section BIND9 will be configured as the Primary server for the domain dev.com. Simply replace dev.com with your FQDN (Fully Qualified Domain Name).

#### Forward Zone File

To add a DNS zone to BIND9, turning BIND9 into a Primary server, first edit `/etc/bind/named.conf.local`:

```
zone "example.com" {
    type master;
    file "/etc/bind/db.dev.com";
};
```
> **Note**
>
> If bind will be receiving automatic updates to the file as with DDNS, then use `/var/lib/bind/db.dev.com` rather than `/etc/bind/db.dev.com` both here and in the copy command below.

Now use an existing zone file as a template to create the `/etc/bind/db.dev.com` file:

```
~$ sudo cp /etc/bind/db.local /etc/bind/db.dev.com
```

Edit the new zone file /etc/bind/db.dev.com and change localhost. to the FQDN ([A fully qualified domain name](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fully_qualified_domain_name)) of your server, leaving the additional . at the end. Change 127.0.0.1 to the nameserver’s IP Address and root.localhost to a valid email address, but with a . instead of the usual @ symbol, again leaving the . at the end. Change the comment to indicate the domain that this file is for.

Create an A record for the base domain, dev.com. Also, create an A record for ns.dev.com, the name server in this example:

`~$ sudo vim /etc/bind/db.dev.com`

```
;
; BIND data file for dev.com
;
$TTL    604800
@       IN      SOA     dev.com. root.dev.com. (
                              2         ; Serial
                         604800         ; Refresh
                          86400         ; Retry
                        2419200         ; Expire
                         604800 )       ; Negative Cache TTL

@       IN      NS      ns.dev.com.
@       IN      A       192.168.1.10
@       IN      AAAA    ::1
ns      IN      A       192.168.1.10
```

#### Reverse Zone File

Now that the zone is setup and resolving names to IP Addresses, a Reverse zone needs to be added to allows DNS to resolve an address to a name.

Edit `/etc/bind/named.conf.local` and add the following:

```
zone "1.168.192.in-addr.arpa" {
    type master;
    file "/etc/bind/db.192";
};
```

> **Note**
>
> Replace 1.168.192 with the first three octets of whatever network you are using. Also, name the zone file `/etc/bind/db.192` appropriately. It should match the first octet of your network.

Now create the `/etc/bind/db.192` file:

```
sudo cp /etc/bind/db.127 /etc/bind/db.192
```

Next edit `/etc/bind/db.192` changing the same options as `/etc/bind/db.dev.com`:

```
;
; BIND reverse data file for local 192.168.1.XXX net
;
$TTL    604800
@       IN      SOA     ns.dev.com. root.dev.com. (
                              2         ; Serial
                         604800         ; Refresh
                          86400         ; Retry
                        2419200         ; Expire
                         604800 )       ; Negative Cache TTL
;
@       IN      NS      ns.
10      IN      PTR     ns.dev.com.
```

The Serial Number in the Reverse zone needs to be incremented on each change as well. For each A record you configure in `/etc/bind/db.dewv.com`, that is for a different address, you need to create a PTR record in `/etc/bind/db.192`.

#### [*Learn More*](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/BIND9ServerHowto#DNS_Record_Types)

> **DNS Record Types**
>
> There are lots of different DNS record types, but some of the most common types are covered below.
>
> **Address Records**
>
> The most commonly used type of record. This record maps an IP Address to a hostname.
>
> ...
